README.md, before:

# liblognorm Python bindings

[**liblognorm**](https://www.liblognorm.com/) is a high-performance log normalization library capable of real-time parsing and field extraction. It converts unstructured log messages into structured formats such as JSON, enabling consistent and efficient downstream processing.

This project provides modern, Pythonic bindings for **liblognorm 2.x**, implemented as a C extension module. It allows Python applications to perform normalization using the same optimized engine found in rsyslog and other production systems.

---

## Installation

### Requirements

*   **Python 3.5+**
*   **liblognorm 2.x** and its development headers
*   **pkg-config** utility
*   A C compiler toolchain (e.g., GCC or Clang)

On Debian-based systems (like Ubuntu), you can install these with:

```bash
sudo apt-get update
sudo apt-get install liblognorm-dev pkg-config python3-dev build-essential
```

### From Source

To build and install the package directly from this source repository:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/zaferb/python-liblognorm.git
cd python-liblognorm
pip install .
```

The setup script automatically uses `pkg-config` to discover the necessary compiler and linker flags for `liblognorm`.

---

## Usage Example

The following example demonstrates how to load a rulebase and normalize log lines entered via standard input.

```python
import liblognorm
import json
import sys

# Get the version of the linked liblognorm C library
print(f"Using liblognorm version: {liblognorm.version()}")

try:
    # 1. Initialize the Lognorm context
    ln = liblognorm.Lognorm()

    # 2. Load normalization rules from a file or directory
    ln.load("path/to/your/rules")

    # Alternatively, for testing or dynamic rules, load from a string:
    # rule_string = "rule=:%host:word%:%msg:rest%"
    # ln.load_from_string(rule_string)

except liblognorm.Error as e:
    print(f"Initialization failed: {e}", file=sys.stderr)
    sys.exit(1)

print("\n>>> Ready. Enter log lines (Ctrl-D to exit):", file=sys.stderr)

# 3. Process lines from stdin
for line in sys.stdin:
    line = line.strip()
    if not line:
        continue

    try:
        # 4. Normalize the log line into a dictionary
        event = ln.normalize(line)
        print(json.dumps(event, indent=2))
    except liblognorm.Error as e:
        # Handle any normalization errors
        print(f"Error: {e}", file=sys.stderr)
```

---

## Error Handling

The library uses Pythonic exceptions for error handling. All exceptions inherit from the base `liblognorm.Error`. This allows you to catch errors with fine-grained control.

```python
try:
    event = ln.normalize(log_line)
except liblognorm.ParserError:
    print("Log line did not match any known format.")
except liblognorm.ConfigError:
    print("The loaded rulebase is invalid.")
except liblognorm.Error as e:
    print(f"A general liblognorm error occurred: {e}")
```

| Exception | Description |
| :--- | :--- |
| `liblognorm.MemoryError` | Out of memory during an operation. |
| `liblognorm.ConfigError` | Invalid rulebase configuration. |
| `liblognorm.ParserError` | Invalid parser state or no matching parser for a message. |
| `liblognorm.RuleError` | A rule is malformed or exceeds size limits. |
| `liblognorm.Error` | A generic or unknown error from the underlying library. |

---

## Type Annotations

This package is fully type-hinted via a bundled `__init__.pyi` stub file. This provides an excellent developer experience with full support for static type checkers (like Mypy) and rich autocompletion in modern IDEs.

---

## Thread Safety

The thread safety of this library depends on how `Lognorm` objects are used. Creating a separate `Lognorm` instance for each thread is inherently safe, as each object maintains its own independent C-level context. However, sharing a **single `Lognorm` instance across multiple threads is not safe** and will lead to race conditions unless all calls to its methods (e.g., `normalize()`, `load()`) are serialized with an external lock, such as a `threading.Lock`. For best performance and safety, the recommended approach is to instantiate a new `Lognorm` object for each thread that requires one.

---

## Character Encoding

This library is designed to operate exclusively on **UTF-8** encoded text. All methods, such as `normalize()`, require a standard Python 3 **`str`** (Unicode) object as input. The wrapper will automatically raise a `TypeError` if a `bytes` object is passed.

It is the application developer's responsibility to ensure that data from external sources (files, network streams, etc.) is correctly decoded into a `str` before being passed to the library. For example, use `open(..., encoding="utf-8")` for UTF-8 files or `open(..., encoding="utf-16")` for UTF-16 files. The library will not attempt to guess encodings or handle improperly decoded data, which may result in a `UnicodeEncodeError` or incorrect parsing.

---

## Attribution and License

This binding was originally developed by **Stanislaw Klekot** ([dozzie@jarowit.net](mailto:dozzie@jarowit.net)) for **Korbank S.A.** The original project can be found at [github.com/korbank/python-liblognorm](https://github.com/korbank/python-liblognorm).

This fork is maintained and modernized by **Zafer Balkan**, and includes the following improvements:

*   Modernized build system using `pyproject.toml` and `pkg-config`.
*   A fully Pythonic API with a robust exception hierarchy.
*   Complete type hints (`.pyi`) for static analysis and IDE support.
*   Improved memory safety and API consistency.
*   Python 3.5+ compatibility.

`python-liblognorm` is distributed under the **3-clause BSD license**. See the included `COPYING` file for the full text.

Commit message:

Enhance Lognorm context initialization with options
Updated Lognorm initialization to include options for adding rules and original messages.

README.md, after:

# liblognorm Python bindings

[**liblognorm**](https://www.liblognorm.com/) is a high-performance log normalization library capable of real-time parsing and field extraction. It converts unstructured log messages into structured formats such as JSON, enabling consistent and efficient downstream processing.

This project provides modern, Pythonic bindings for **liblognorm 2.x**, implemented as a C extension module. It allows Python applications to perform normalization using the same optimized engine found in rsyslog and other production systems.

---

## Installation

### Requirements

*   **Python 3.5+**
*   **liblognorm 2.x** and its development headers
*   **pkg-config** utility
*   A C compiler toolchain (e.g., GCC or Clang)

On Debian-based systems (like Ubuntu), you can install these with:

```bash
sudo apt-get update
sudo apt-get install liblognorm-dev pkg-config python3-dev build-essential
```

### From Source

To build and install the package directly from this source repository:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/zaferb/python-liblognorm.git
cd python-liblognorm
pip install .
```

The setup script automatically uses `pkg-config` to discover the necessary compiler and linker flags for `liblognorm`.

---

## Usage Example

The following example demonstrates how to load a rulebase and normalize log lines entered via standard input.

```python
import liblognorm
import json
import sys

# Get the version of the linked liblognorm C library
print(f"Using liblognorm version: {liblognorm.version()}")

try:
    # 1. Initialize the Lognorm context, enabling specific options
    #    (All options are keyword-only and default to False)
    ln = liblognorm.Lognorm(add_rule=True, add_original_message=True)

    # 2. Load normalization rules from a file or directory
    ln.load("path/to/your/rules")

    # Alternatively, for testing or dynamic rules, load from a string:
    # rule_string = "rule=:%host:word%:%msg:rest%"
    # ln.load_from_string(rule_string)

except liblognorm.Error as e:
    print(f"Initialization failed: {e}", file=sys.stderr)
    sys.exit(1)

print("\n>>> Ready. Enter log lines (Ctrl-D to exit):", file=sys.stderr)

# 3. Process lines from stdin
for line in sys.stdin:
    line = line.strip()
    if not line:
        continue

    try:
        # 4. Normalize the log line into a dictionary
        event = ln.normalize(line)
        print(json.dumps(event, indent=2))
    except liblognorm.Error as e:
        # Handle any normalization errors
        print(f"Error: {e}", file=sys.stderr)
```

---

## Error Handling

The library uses Pythonic exceptions for error handling. All exceptions inherit from the base `liblognorm.Error`. This allows you to catch errors with fine-grained control.

```python
try:
    event = ln.normalize(log_line)
except liblognorm.ParserError:
    print("Log line did not match any known format.")
except liblognorm.ConfigError:
    print("The loaded rulebase is invalid.")
except liblognorm.Error as e:
    print(f"A general liblognorm error occurred: {e}")
```

| Exception | Description |
| :--- | :--- |
| `liblognorm.MemoryError` | Out of memory during an operation. |
| `liblognorm.ConfigError` | Invalid rulebase configuration. |
| `liblognorm.ParserError` | Invalid parser state or no matching parser for a message. |
| `liblognorm.RuleError` | A rule is malformed or exceeds size limits. |
| `liblognorm.Error` | A generic or unknown error from the underlying library. |

---

## Type Annotations

This package is fully type-hinted via a bundled `__init__.pyi` stub file. This provides an excellent developer experience with full support for static type checkers (like Mypy) and rich autocompletion in modern IDEs.

---

## Thread Safety

The thread safety of this library depends on how `Lognorm` objects are used. Creating a separate `Lognorm` instance for each thread is inherently safe, as each object maintains its own independent C-level context. However, sharing a **single `Lognorm` instance across multiple threads is not safe** and will lead to race conditions unless all calls to its methods (e.g., `normalize()`, `load()`) are serialized with an external lock, such as a `threading.Lock`. For best performance and safety, the recommended approach is to instantiate a new `Lognorm` object for each thread that requires one.

---

## Character Encoding

This library is designed to operate exclusively on **UTF-8** encoded text. All methods, such as `normalize()`, require a standard Python 3 **`str`** (Unicode) object as input. The wrapper will automatically raise a `TypeError` if a `bytes` object is passed.

It is the application developer's responsibility to ensure that data from external sources (files, network streams, etc.) is correctly decoded into a `str` before being passed to the library. For example, use `open(..., encoding="utf-8")` for UTF-8 files or `open(..., encoding="utf-16")` for UTF-16 files. The library will not attempt to guess encodings or handle improperly decoded data, which may result in a `UnicodeEncodeError` or incorrect parsing.

---

## Attribution and License

This binding was originally developed by **Stanislaw Klekot** ([dozzie@jarowit.net](mailto:dozzie@jarowit.net)) for **Korbank S.A.** The original project can be found at [github.com/korbank/python-liblognorm](https://github.com/korbank/python-liblognorm).

This fork is maintained and modernized by **Zafer Balkan**, and includes the following improvements:

*   Modernized build system using `pyproject.toml` and `pkg-config`.
*   A fully Pythonic API with a robust exception hierarchy.
*   Complete type hints (`.pyi`) for static analysis and IDE support.
*   Improved memory safety and API consistency.
*   Python 3.5+ compatibility.

`python-liblognorm` is distributed under the **3-clause BSD license**. See the included `COPYING` file for the full text.
